maybe maybe we could we could start our
discussion of sexual differences in
mating strategy with that so first of
all what's the evidence that suggests
that women are in fact choosier when it
comes to sexual partners than men and
how much choosier are they okay okay
great question well so maybe first we
could def just Define for listeners what
sexual selection theory is uh because
most people when they think about
Evolution they think of survival of the
fittest and that sort of nature ring
tooth and clock and kind of romness too
which you know that that's kind of
implicit in the natural selection Theory
whereas sexual selection is anything but
random yeah absolutely so so sexual
selection so if if if natural selection
this is oversimplified but is um the
evolution of adaptations due to their
survival advantage or the survival
advantage that accred to the possessors
uh so things like fear of snakes fear of
heights spiders Darkness strangers and
so forth food preferences things that
led the better survival sexual selection
deals with the evolution of qualities
that lead to mating success and Darwin
identified two causal processes by which
mating success could uh occur one is
same-sex competition or intrasexual
competition and the logic there is that
whatever uh he he thought about it in
terms of contest competition where there
was a physical battle like two Stags
locking horns in combat uh with the
Victor gaining sexual access to the
female loser are ambling off with a
broken antler dejected with low
self-esteem and probably needing some
Psychotherapy uh but the logic was
whatever qualities led to success in
these same seex battles whether it be
athleticism uh strength agility cunning
or whatever those qualities get got
passed on in greater numbers due to the
sexual access that the victors acred uh
qualities associated with losing
basically bit The evolutionary dust uh
the second component so intersexual
competition which actually the logic is
more General than Darwin and vision so
like in our species as we were alluding
to we often compete for position and
Status hierarchies uh and so we we can
engage in in seexual competition without
engaging in this physical battle or
contest competition although I think
that the contest competition was also
part of human evolutionary history with
with males the other component process
is uh basically what Darwin called
female choice and the logic there is
that whatever qualities if there's some
consensus about the qualities that are
desired that men possessing the desired
qualities have a mating Advantage they
get preferentially chosen those lacking
the desired qualities basically become
incels or involuntarily celibate they
get shunned banished or ignored uh now
the The Twist on that and so I think
sexual selection is is by far a a more
interesting process and definitely has
occurred with respect to humans but the
twist there is that we have mutual mate
choice at least when it comes to
long-term mating especially I should say
especially when it comes to long-term
mating uh and and that gets to the issue
of uh trier's theory of Parental
investment where he said he asked the
question well which sex does the
choosing which sex does the competing uh
and he his answer was the sex that
invests more uh in Offspring tends to be
cheesier sex that invests less tends to
be more competitive for access to those
desirable uh members of the opposite sex
but in long-term mating uh now we know
from our reproductive biology that women
have that nine-month pregnancy which is
obligatory so women can't say look I'm
I'm really busy with my career I really
only want to put in three months it's
it's just part of our reproductive
biology H to produce one child and men
can that same child through one act of
sex and so uh so women are at least in
when it comes to sex the choosier sex
the higher investing sex in part because
the costs of making a bad mating
decision are much more severe for women
than for men man and woman hook up have
sex for one night in the morning they
both realize oh this is a mistake I
shouldn't have done that well if the
woman gets pregnant then she might be
pregnant with a guy who is not going to
invest in her Offspring a guy perhaps is
someone that uh has poor genetic
material uh it does not have a robust
immune system Etc so so anyway so that's
that's a long-winded answer to your
question about sexual
selection go ahead please go ahead oh I
was just going to say that the you asked
about the
evidence uh for females being choser and
they are choser primarily in the context
of casual sex or short-term sex so
that's where you find the big sex
differences and so one of the classic uh
and there there's a ton of evidence for
this this is a a a sex difference that
that I capture in the book under the
category of desire for sexual variety uh
so men have a much greater desire for
meaning a variety of sex partners uh
than than women do and so the choosing
comes in on I'll just give you one
experiment this is a classic study done
by um Elaine hfield and Russell Clark
where they had male and female
Confederates which uh for listeners are
members of the experimental team it
doesn't mean people from the South
United States uh there uh but they had
male and female Confederates simply walk
up to members of the opposite sex on a
college campus and say hi I've been
noticing you around campus lately I find
you very attractive would you and they
asked them one of three questions would
you go on a date with me tonight would
you come back to my apartment with me
would you have sex with me and it was a
between groups design so they simply
recorded the percentage of individuals
who agreed to these three different
requests and of the women about half
about a little over 50% agreed to go out
on a date with the guy uh 6% agreed to
go back to his apartment 0% agreed to
have sex with him most women need a
little more
information uh about the guy before
they're willing to have sex of the men
approach also about 50 by the female
Confederate about 50% agreed to go out
on the date 69% agreed to go back to her
apartment and 75% agreed to have sex
with her and so if you talk about
choosiness um uh are you willing to have
sex with a total stranger who you've met
for 30 seconds uh
women unwilling to and in general uh men
very willing to and this is a study
that's been replicated now in several
European studies very difficult to do
this as you might imagine to get this by
the irbs or ethics committees in in the
United States anyway um I assume it's
similar in Canada worse or worse so but
yeah yeah the kinds of studies we really
want to do are are more difficult to do
nowadays but it it's been replicated in
in U several Western EUR European
countries and you can get women off of
the 0% you can get a few percent of the
women saying yes if the guys really
really Charming you know if he's a Brad
Pit or or I don't know what the modern
equivalent was Ryan Gosling or one of
the uh you know or or perhaps a famous
rock star uh so um so but that's one
illustration of uh the answer to your
question about what is the evidence for
female choosiness now the interesting
thing here's I'll give you one more so
there are studies that ask what is the
minimum
percentile of intelligence that you
would accept in a potential partner so
and you and you know we explain
percentiles to people so they understand
99th percentile first percentile 50th
and so forth and um and basically for
things like a marriage partner uh men
and women are roughly equal they both
are very exact they say what they want
like say 65th 70th percentile
intelligence uh where the sex difference
comes up is just a sex partner a pure
sex partner with no investment uh women
still maintain they still want let's say
60th or 60 plus percentile in
intelligence whereas men drop you know
to embarrassing levels that doesn't
really it becomes irrelevant if 30th
40th percentile men go you know if she
can Mumble a little bit that's fine or
or even not so um that's another
indication of female choosiness that
that is they maintain greater
choosiness when it comes to short-term
sex and um and are simply less
comfortable with having sex with total
strangers or casual sex and uh here's
I'll give you one more now that I'm
rambling on and then I'll get to some
other uh interesting issues is uh this
is an item on the
sociosexuality inventory that colleagues
Steve gangestad and Jeff Simpson
developed a long time ago but one of the
items is it's an attitude item and it
says sex without love is okay do you
agree age with that or disagree with
that and there you get a large sex
difference so in the seven-point scale
where four is the midpoint uh men
average about 5.5 so they say yeah sex
without love yeah yeah that's okay women
are about 3.5 okay they're below the uh
that midpoint it's another indication um
of this sex difference in choosing do
you know if that's modulated by Big Five
trait
agreeableness oh that's a great question
I I haven't seen any studies that link
that okay big five to to that item or
the sociosexuality inventory in general
yeah well you'd wonder why if compassion
and empathy might be one of the things
driving that and the value that's placed
on that as a consequence of being higher
low in agreeableness and that would fit
in to some degree with the dark Triad
work that because the primary difference
there is we'll talk about the dark Triad
in a minute is that the dark Triad types
are low and agreeable essentially it's
not the only only thing but that's
Central yes so and that's where there's
a big there's a big sex difference